

        ---===[ Qubes Security Bulletin #5 ]===---


Problem description
---------------------

Yesterday, Xen.org has announced a bunch of security advisories
(XSA20-32 [1]) affecting the Xen hypervisor, some of which apply to
Qubes OS Release 1 as well.

The impact of those bugs appears to be limited to DoS attacks only,
however. Nevertheless, a bug is a bug, and all the users are encouraged
to patch.

Patching
----------

We have uploaded the patched Xen packages for Qubes Release 1 (version
4.1.2-7). In order to update your system, either click on the "Upload"
button in the Qubes Manager after selecting Dom0, or use the following
command-line command:

sudo qubes-dom0-updates

A system restart will be required afterwards.

If you use Anti Evil Maid, you will need to reseal your secret
passphrase to new PCR values, as PCR14 will change because of a new
xen.gz binary.


Discussion
------------

Out of the bugs mentioned above, the one described in XSA 29 [2] seems
to be having some potential for more than just a DoS. Xen.org in the
advisory wrote this:

"A malicious guest administrator can cause Xen to crash. If the out of
address space bounds access does not lead to a crash, a carefully
crafted privilege escalation cannot be excluded, even though the guest
doesn't itself control the values written."

It's not immediately obvious to me that the guest cannot indeed really
control the values written, but I must admit I don't fully understand
how does the XENMEM_exchange hypercall work in detail and some more
investigations would be needed here in order to exclude exploitation
possibility with some higher degree of confidence (perhaps a good
exercise to someone from the list?).

References
------------

[1] http://wiki.xen.org/wiki/Security_Announcements
[2] http://lists.xen.org/archives/html/xen-devel/2012-12/msg00082.html

Thanks,
joanna.


