

        ---===[ Qubes Security Bulletin #11 ]===---

Clipboard leak when copying between VMs due to lack of truncating


Problem description
---------------------

Due to lack of explicit truncating of the file which holds the content
of the Qubes inter-VM clipboard, in some situations parts of the
inter-VM clipboard buffer might be readable to another VM.

In order to trigger this bug, a user would need to initiate inter-VM
clipboard copy operation from domain A first, then, without pasting this
buffer to any other VM, initiate another inter-VM copy operation from
domain B, which would have to be a Windows-based AppVM, and then paste
the buffer into domain C. If the buffer copied from domain A was larger
than that copied from domain B, and if no paste operation was issued in
the meantime, which would otherwise wipe the buffer, then domain C would
receive the remaining bytes of the buffer the user copied from domain A
(despite user intention for C to receive only the buffer copied from B).

The bug is not trigger-able by software (malware) in the VMs, only
physical user can initiate inter-VM clipboard copy operations in Qubes.
Additionally, in a normal workflow, the user would likely be issuing
matching copy and paste operations in pairs, in which cases the buffer
would be properly wiped on each paste operation.

The bug affects only situations when the 2nd copy is from a
Windows-based AppVM. This is because clipboard copy operations from
Linux-based AppVMs are done using a "shortcut" and take a different,
non-vulnerable code path.

Patching
----------

The specific packages that resolve the problems mentioned
in this bulletin have been uploaded to the current repo:

* qubes-gui-dom0-2.1.34-1

The packages are to be installed in Dom0 via qubes-dom0-update command
or via the Qubes graphical manager.

Credits
----------

The bug was discovered and fixed by a Qubes core developer, Marek
Marczykowski-GÃ³recki <marmarek@invisiblethingslab.com>

References
------------

[1] The commit that introduced the bug:

http://git.qubes-os.org/?p=qubes-r2/gui-daemon.git;a=commit;h=72acbaf688a864a0838b6ed2fe5c14ee93c31ef6

[2] The commit that fixes the bug:

http://git.qubes-os.org/?p=marmarek/gui-daemon.git;a=commitdiff;h=9800e1ab9954cb247d5dc50da325e875a09a98ff

Thanks,
joanna.

--
The Qubes Security Team
http://wiki.qubes-os.org/trac/wiki/SecurityPage


