

             ---===[ Qubes Security Bulletin #17 ]===---

                            March 10, 2015


   Xen DoS from malicious driver domains or devices (XSA 120 & 124)


Quick Summary
==============

The Xen Security Team has published two security advisories today (XSA
120 and 124, see [1] and [2]), both related to potential DoS attacks
coming from untrusted driver domains and/or devices. We consider these
attacks to be of minor practical importance for desktop security on a
system like Qubes OS.

Discussion
===========

The wording of the XSA 124 seems unnecessarily apocalyptic in our
opinion (it comes especially as a surprise compared to the wording
used for, much more worrying, XSA 123, discussed in QSB #18).

The general message of the two Xen advisories might be summarized as:
malicious driver domains (XSA120) or devices (XSA124), might perform a
DoS attack against the host, despite VT-d protections in place. While
clearly DoS attacks are of a much concern for server-side deployments
of Xen, they are much less worrying for desktop systems. Also,
maliciously modified devices (XSA124) do not seem necessarily that
much of a problem in data centers, where hardware is typically
considered trusted, while in case of desktop systems there will always
remain ways for malicious devices to DoS, or even brick, the platform,
e.g. via electrical short-circuiting.

The XSA 124 is hinting about potential "other mechanism bypassing the
software layers" which we take to mean e.g. BDF spoofing attacks from
devices that can (choose to) not adhere to PCI Express specification,
or different forms of MSI or other event injection attacks. Some of
the Qubes developers have spent considerable amount of time
researching efficiency of VT-d in containing attacks coming from
malicious driver domains and devices (some described in [3]) and we
are presently not aware of potential for privilege escalation attacks
in a system with full VT-d protections deployed, i.e. one with correct
programming of VT-d and other PCIe security mechanisms, such as ACS.

This is not to state that the specific versions of Xen, especially one
that is presently used for Qubes OS, does indeed address all the
potential problems of attacks coming from physically modified devices,
but we find the statement from the XSA 124 advisory that "all
hypervisors supporting PCI passthrough are vulnerable to this kind of
problem;" unnecessarily alarming.

Patching
=========

The specific packages that resolve the problem discussed in this
bulletin (and also brining a few other reliability patches to Xen)
have been uploaded to the security-testing repository:

* New Dom0 kernel packages (kernel-3.12.38-1)

The packages are to be installed in Dom0 via qubes-dom0-update command
or via the Qubes graphical manager.

A system restart will be required afterwards.

If you use Anti Evil Maid, you will need to reseal your secret
passphrase to new PCR values, as PCR14 will change because of a new
xen.gz binary.

These packages will be moved to the current repository over the coming
days once they receive more testing from the community.

About Qubes Security Testing Repository
----------------------------------------

The security-testing is a new Qubes package repository that has been
introduced recently. It is disabled by default, and its purpose is to
allow better and wider testing of security critical updates, before
they make it to the "current" (default) repository.

This allows the users (rather than Qubes developers) to make the
tradeoffs of whether to install security updates early vs. wait until
they get more tested by the community. This accounts for the fact that
Qubes developers have limited ability to perform thorough testing
themselves. To help with the process we provide detailed analysis of
the security problems addressed by each QSB.

The security-testing repo definition is provided by the latest
core-agent-linux package (version 2.1.49) for the VMs, and
qubes-release-2-11 for Dom0. These packages are already available in
the default current repository.


Credits
========

This bugs has been found by Xen Security Team, and reported via Xen
Security mailing list.


References
===========

[1] http://xenbits.xen.org/xsa/advisory-120.html
[2] http://xenbits.xen.org/xsa/advisory-124.html
[3] http://www.invisiblethingslab.com/resources/2011/Software%20Attacks%20on%20Intel%20VT-d.pdf


The Qubes Security Team
http://wiki.qubes-os.org/trac/wiki/SecurityPage
